virtually every term of political
discourse has two meanings one is its
literal meaning and the second which is
often quite different is its usage in
political discourse or political warfare
so for example take communism it has a
literal meaning literal meaning is a
core principle is workers control over
production a community control over
decision-making and so on that's the
literal meaning the way it's used is for
a system is almost radically the
opposite absolutist control from the top
virtually no participation and so on or
say take democracy democracy is supposed
to be a system of government of by and
for of the people that's what we hail we
look at the actual meaning say us which
is a pillar of democracy we find that
about 70 percent of the population the
lower 70 percent on the income scale
have no influence whatsoever on politics
on political decisions so no attention
is paid to them tension increases
slightly as you move up when you get to
the very top if people get what they
want because they essentially make make
policy or take free trade agreements
like right now the United States and
Pacific countries are negotiating a
trans-pacific partnership its hailed as
a wonderful free trade agreement it's
being done in secret there's a reason
for that not total secret it's not
secret from the hundreds of corporate
lobbyists and lawyers who are writing it
they know all about
little bits and pieces have leaked out
thanks to WikiLeaks and they reveal what
any rational person would expect when
corporate lobbyists and lawyers are
writing an agreement very much like
NAFTA north american free trade
agreement and others it's not a free
trade agreement in the phrase north
american free trade agreement
the only accurate words are north
american that's not free it has very
heavy protectionist elements designed to
maximize profits for pharmaceutical
corporations and other affect oligopoly
is supported by the state onerous patent
regulations which ensure the drug prices
will cost way more than they ought to
for drug company profits a lot of it
isn't about trade at all
it's about investor rights even the part
that is about trade is trade in a very
strange sense so nafta for example is
supposed to deal with trade between the
United States and Mexico take a look at
the trade between the United States and
Mexico there's much excitement about how
much it's increased corporations are
secret organizations we don't have
details of what they do but the general
estimates are that roughly forty to 50
percent of the cross-border transactions
are internal to a command economy so for
example if General Motors that makes
parts in Indiana ascends them to
northern Mexico McCulloch Dora to be
assembled by cheap labor and then the
resulting automobile was sold in Los
Angeles
that's called trade in both directions
it's about as much trade as in the old
Soviet Union if parts were made in the
Leningrad and sent the worse offer
assembly and sold in Moscow we wouldn't
have called that trade it's internal to
a command
economy happens to cross borders but and
that's a large part of so-called trade
much of the content of these agreements
are things like for example the laws
granting corporations the right to sue
governments on the grounds that their
future profits might be harmed say by
making a national park somewhere and
then this is adjudicated by a corporate
run group of decision makers all totally
out of the public view so it's not free
trade it's not trade it's certainly not
an agreement at least if people are part
of their countries first of all they
barely know about it after the extent
they know about it they mostly oppose it
but these are and that same with the
trans-pacific partnership the European
US trade agreement these are and then it
goes on term after term pick your choice
almost it takes a security governments a
primary principle of international
relations theory is that governments act
to protect their security security for
whom security for the population no they
act in many ways to harm the population
easy to show that their own populations
as well security for the state itself
yeah they want that's the reason for the
secrecy a lot of the secrecy is to
protect state authority from scrutiny by
their own public security for
concentrations of domestic power like
say the corporate sector definitely
that's what the trans-pacific
partnership is about so yes security in
a certain sense and not security in the
sense that we're supposed to believe it
and as I say you can run through term
after term and you find pretty much the
same thing so has this process increased
through the 20th century yes quite
definitely and for good reasons
over the years popular struggle has won
many victories the franchise's increased
people have greater freedom states have
less power to coerce their populations
violently I mean it's not a straight
line but in general that's the tendency
and as it becomes harder to control
people by force it becomes necessary to
control them in other ways and they
believe by propaganda by deceit by
manipulation and this is quite conscious
if you look go back about a century in
the freest countries in the world
England in the United States it was
recognized openly that the problems of
controlling the population are
increasing and therefore
new mechanisms must be developed in fact
new industries devoted to controlling
the public mind to controlling attitudes
and beliefs that's the origin of the
huge public relations industry which is
a massive industry hundreds of billions
of dollars a year devoted to what we
used to call propaganda controlling
attitudes and beliefs and if our
striking to see the way it works so for
example we're supposed to believe in
markets everybody supposed to heal all
markets turn on the television set and
take a look at the advertisements the
advertisements are designed to undermine
markets markets are based take an
economics course markets are based on
informed consumers making rational
choices take a look at the ad for an
automobile or toothpaste or whatever is
it trying to create a an informed
consumer making a rational choice no
it's a huge effort tremendous waste for
the economy but enormous expenditures to
create uninformed consumers who will
make irrational choices because it's
critically necessary
to undermine a literal market behavior
that's a kind of a consequence of the
growth of oligopoly a very strong
tendency of the economy towards
oligopoly few major corporations
controlling a market they don't want to
have price wars they want basically
fixed prices so they have to turn to
some sort of product differentiation
that is basically meaningless and that
requires massive delusion so-called add
what's called advertising delusion of
the public to try to get them to pick
this identical product rather than that
identical product that's Alma point by
point almost and this it grows as
freedom groups the more freedom is one
the greater the effort to control
attitudes and beliefs by mechanisms of
this kind that's why you have the huge
growth of these industries of propaganda
precisely in the free societies other
countries tried to imitate them Soviet
Union Lenin Lenin's Russia tried to
imitate it but it was so clumsy that the
nobody believed the word they were
seeing on the other hand the Nazis tried
to imitate it and they did very well
unfortunately that gurbles was very
struck by American commercial
advertising and the techniques it was
using and adapted them to with a good
German efficiency and regrettably that
work quite well but that's what's that's
exactly what you'd expect as more
freedom and opportunity as one and
that's what we discover are there ways
to overcome this problem well one way is
to dismantle the course of institutions
that are at the core of the system if
you have very high concentration of
power at the top they're going to be
true obviously working on ways to and
sustain and enhance their power and the
best
Ellucian is to devolve power down to
people to move towards authentic
democracy but short of that people have
to develop if the long the institutions
remain the course of institutions that
people have to develop mechanisms of
self-defense it's very difficult to do
on your own that you can but it's not it
gets easier when people are organized
and interact and have associations and
whatever they may be in which they can
discuss things with each other and
develop their ideas and so on that's of
course one of the reasons why power
systems are so eager to undermine and
destroy what are called secondary
associations groupings of popular
organizations of people who interact
with one another the ideal from the
point of view of a coercive institution
at the Dalit Aryan state or corporation
is to have people atomized each person
alone the you and your television set or
that's it you shouldn't have any more
structure than that but by overcoming
those constraints it's possible to
defend oneself and of course these
institutions are not a graven and stoned
are not god-given they can be dissolved
you